feat: rework IPAM documentation (#10135)
opsmill/infrahub: docs/docs/ipam/overview.mdx

:::

## Hierarchy

IP prefixes and addresses form a tree based on network containment — a prefix can be the parent or child of another prefix, and an address always belongs to the most specific prefix that contains it. Infrahub reconciles this tree automatically on every create, update, or delete, so parent, child, and address-to-prefix relationships stay correct without manual intervention. See [Query IPAM data](./query-ipam-data.mdx) for the relationships exposed on prefixes and addresses.

## Utilization

Every IP prefix exposes a read-only `utilization` attribute, computed on read from the graph, using one of two formulas based on `member_type`:

- **`prefix` mode** — utilization is the address space of the child prefixes, divided by the address space of the prefix itself. For example, `192.0.2.0/24` with one `192.0.2.0/26` child reports 25%.
- **`address` mode** — utilization is the number of IP addresses assigned to the prefix, divided by the number of usable addresses in the prefix. For example, `192.0.2.0/26` holds up to 62 usable addresses (excluding network and broadcast); with 20 addresses assigned, it reports 32%.

> Network and broadcast addresses count toward the usable total when `is_pool` is `true`, for IPv4 prefixes with a `/31` length (per [RFC 3021](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3021)), and for `/32` prefixes.

Reviewer: Two gaps against `backend/infrahub/core/ipam/size.py:10-16`. The `-2` subtraction is gated on `version == 4`, so **IPv6 prefixes always report full address space** — unstated here, and the case a reader is most likely to get wrong. And `/31` and `/32` are one condition in the code (`prefixlen < 31` is the guard), so listing them separately reads as more special-casing than there is.

```suggestion
Network and broadcast addresses count toward the usable total when `is_pool` is `true`, when an IPv4 prefix is `/31` or longer (per [RFC 3021](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3021)), and for every IPv6 prefix.
```

Deleting a namespace deletes every IP prefix and IP address it contains. The `default` namespace cannot be deleted.

## Branching

Creating, updating, or deleting an IP namespace, prefix, or address is supported on any branch. Hierarchy reconciliation runs immediately after each mutation, and again when the branch is merged or rebased into another branch — Infrahub reads the diff between the two branches, identifies which prefixes and addresses changed, and reconciles only those. See [Plan changes on a branch](./plan-changes-on-a-branch.mdx) for the full workflow, including concurrency control for concurrent branch-based changes.

## Resource Manager

Resource Pool is the recommended way to allocate IP addresses and prefixes in automation — provisioning pipelines, generators, and CI/CD workflows. A `CoreIPAddressPool` or `CoreIPPrefixPool` draws from your IPAM prefixes as its resources and returns the next available address or subnet. Passing the same identifier on repeated calls returns the same allocation, so a provisioning script can run more than once without allocating the same resource twice.

> Infrahub also exposes lower-level GraphQL queries — `InfrahubIPAddressGetNextAvailable` and `InfrahubIPPrefixGetNextAvailable` — that return the next free address or subnet without creating a record and without the pool's cross-branch allocation guarantees. Use Resource Pool for production workflows; reach for these only to look up a value without persisting it.

Reviewer: "reach for these" is figurative. The voice rule asks for words in their literal sense, because much of the audience reads English as a second or third language.

```suggestion
Infrahub also exposes lower-level GraphQL queries — `InfrahubIPAddressGetNextAvailable` and `InfrahubIPPrefixGetNextAvailable` — that return the next free address or subnet without creating a record and without the pool's cross-branch allocation guarantees. Use Resource Pool for production workflows; use these only to look up a value without persisting it.
```
